JUDY WOODRUFF: From
President Trump today,
an abrupt announcement.
He is reinstating a ban
on transgender troops,
and reopening the debate
on who gets to serve
in the U.S. military.
Word of the military policy
reversal came not from the
Pentagon, but from the president
on Twitter.
He said: "The United States
government will not accept or
allow transgender individuals
to serve in any capacity
in the U.S. military."
And he went on: "Our military
must be focused on victory,
and cannot be burdened with the
tremendous medical costs and
disruption that transgender
in the military would entail."
Candidate Trump had promised
to protect the rights
of transgender people.
White House Press Secretary
Sarah Huckabee Sanders was
asked about that today.
SARAH HUCKABEE SANDERS, INCOMING
WHITE HOUSE PRESS SECRETARY:
He's also voiced that this
is a very expensive and
disruptive policy, and based on
consultation that he's had with
his national security team, came
to the conclusion that it erodes
military readiness and unit
cohesion, and made the
decision based on that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Socially
conservative groups
welcomed the decision, but
it drew quick condemnation
from many Democrats,
including New York Congressman
Sean Patrick Maloney.
REP.
SEAN PATRICK MALONEY (D), New
York: We have heard every tired
-- every tired discriminatory
argument before, and they have
always fallen away over time in
the face of reason and decency
and equality.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Some leading
members of the president's own
party also rejected the new
ban, including Senators John
McCain and Orrin Hatch and Joni
Ernst, who served in the U.S.
military in Iraq.
ASHTON CARTER, Former
U.S. Secretary Of Defense:
I'm announcing today
that we're ending the
ban on transgender Americans
in the United States military.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All of this
comes more than a year after the
Obama administration's secretary
of defense, Ashton Carter,
announced that transgender
people would be allowed to serve
openly.
The RAND Cooperation
estimates there are up
to 6,600 transgender
troops on active duty,
with possibly another
4,000 in the Reserves.
Carter gave the armed services
until this month to adjust.
But his successor, James Mattis,
recently delayed implementation
by another six months.
The Joint Chiefs of Staff said
they need to determine whether
transgender recruits have
medical issues affecting
their ability to deploy and
meet physical standards.
Republican Congresswoman
Vicky Hartzler of Missouri
has unsuccessfully
proposed legislation
to bar medical services
for transgender troops.
REP.
VICKY HARTZLER (R), Missouri:
The bottom line is, do we need
to spend any of our precious
tax dollars on these surgeries,
when we have soldiers that are
having trouble getting body
armor and bullets?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Brynn
Tannehill is a transgender
former Navy pilot, and
director for an advocacy
group that fights for
transgender service members.
LT.
CMDR.
BRYNN TANNEHILL (RET.)
ÑMD-BOÑU.S. Navy:
What's extraordinarily
disruptive to unit
cohesion is taking people who
have unique, valuable skills
within their units, and yanking
them out of those units,
ones that are often only
one deep in their units.
And you can't replace that.
And that's what affects mission
and mission accomplishment.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The White
House indicated today
that the military will
take the lead on deciding
what becomes of transgender
people already serving.
Our own William Brangham has
reported on transgender people
serving in the military.
He joins me now to
further explain today's
move by the president.
So, William, first,
something about the term.
We are talking about
people who are transgender.
The term transition or
transitioning is also used.
Help us understand
the distinction.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: I understand
this can be confusing
for a lot of people.
Just basic facts.
To be transgender just
means that your gender
identity doesn't match
your birth certificate.
So, you're born as female, but
you do not feel you're female.
You feel like you're a male.
To transition can mean a
whole spectrum of things.
It can mean -- it's not just
the surgery people tend to think
of, and certainly not every
transgender person
has that surgery.
It can simply mean
taking hormones.
It can just mean changing your
clothes, changing your name.
So, transitioning can be an
entire spectrum from things,
from medical technologies to
just changing your
personality a little.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, we heard
the president - - the press
secretary at the White House,
Sarah Sanders, citing the
president's concerns, and
he tweeted about this.
He says it's expensive,
the cost, the disruption.
She talked about
readiness, unit cohesion.
Are those factors that the
Pentagon is concerned about?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: As far as we
know, there's no good evidence
that the Pentagon has ever
been concerned about
those two things.
On the issue of disruption,
the RAND study that you cited
in your report, they did a
study that looked at whether or
not having trans service members
would cause this disruption.
And they surveyed 18 different
countries around the world,
including the U.K., Australia,
Israel, all of whom have
trans service members,
and those countries
reported no disruptions
whatsoever, no need to
change their policies.
On the issue of cost,
the president said
this is -- I think he's
implying that somehow this
is going to cost a
fortune for the budget.
Again, this RAND study
indicated that the rough costs
per year are about $2 million
to $8 million.
That's not a lot in a $600
billion Pentagon budget.
And just for point of
comparison, let's say
those RAND numbers are
totally wrong and it's
even more.
The Pentagon right now spends
10 times that amount on Cialis
and Viagra, so just as a
point of comparison.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Another
kind of medication.
William, why is
this happening now?
Is there a sense out of the
blue the president tweeted
about this, this morning?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: It did
seem to come out of the blue.
In fact, we reached out
to the Pentagon today
to ask them about that.
And an indication of how much
they were caught flat-footed
about this, they had nothing to
say and referred us
back to the White House.
My sense is that
there's two reasons.
One, ever since the Obama
administration introduced
this change, there have
been social conservatives,
Mike Pence in particular, who
have been very resistant to it.
They think it's social
engineering of the worst kind.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The
vice president.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Exactly.
And they have fought it.
But, today, very specifically,
there was a fight in the
House amongst the GOP -- they
were trying to getting
a spending bill passed
with all sorts of goodies
that the president
wanted, including money
for his border wall.
Some deficit and defense
hawks said we need to put in a
piece of legislation that bans
transgender sex
reassignment surgery.
That was pushed back
on by the leadership.
And, apparently, some of these
members went to the president
and said, help us out with
this policy.
And he then went 10, 50 yards
further down the line and
announced this outright ban.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, again,
we see divisions inside the
Republican Party over this.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Exactly.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, finally,
William, what does this mean
for active-duty members now
who are transgender,
whether they're serving in
this country or overseas?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: That's
the great unknown.
Sarah Huckabee Sanders said,
we're working out the policy.
The Pentagon has
no comment on this.
I talked to some people today
who are in touch with trans
service members right now, and
they said that there is an
incredible feeling of fear and
panic and just uncertainty, that
you have signed up.
You might be deployed
overseas right now.
All of a sudden, you look at
your phone, the president has
tweeted that your position in
the military is over, so
big unanswered questions.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A number
of questions here.
William Brangham, we thank you.